**ID**: 2025-04-0414:21  
**Tags**: #rust #learning  #collections #intermediate 
**Related**: 

---

## Content

In Rust, collections, refer to a data structure provided by the standard library that can store multiple value . Unlike arrays and tuples, which have a fixed size determined at the compile time , collections are more flexible and can grow shrink dynamically at runtime. 

They are allocated on the heap, and Rust's ownership ensures memory safety when working with them . the most commonly used collections are Vec , String, Hashmap and Hashset.


#### VEC( Vector )

- A growable, ordered list of items of the same type, similar to a dynamic array
- Contiguous memory allocation, indexable can append or remove elements

```rust

let mut v = Vec::new();
v.push(1);
v.push(2);
v.push(3);
println!("{:?}",v);
```


When you need to sequence of elements and want to add or remove items dynamically

#### String

- A growable UTF-8 encoded text buffer, It's essentially a Vec<"u8"> with extra gurantees for valid text.
- Mutable (unlike &str) , heap-allocated

```rust
let mut s=String::from("Hello");
s.push_str(", world");
println!("{}",s);
```

- &str is for immutable string slices, String is for owned mutable strings;

#### HashMaps

- A key value store where key are unique and map to specific values , implemented as a hash table 
- Fast look ups by keys, keys must implement Eq and Hash

```rust

use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores= HashMap::new();
scores.insert("Alice",50);
scores.insert("Bob",75);
println!("Alice scores:{:?}",scores.get("Alice"));
```

#### HashSet
- A collection of unique values, also based on a hash table 
- Unordered , no duplicates, fast membership testing .

```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;
let mut set= HashSet::new();
set.insert(1);
set.insert(2);
set.insert(1); //duplicate, ignored
println!("{:?}",set);

```


### Key features of Rust collections

- Ownership: Collections own their data. When a collection goes out of scope, its contents are automatically dropped, preventing memory leaks.
- Safety: Rust's borrow checker ensures you can't accidentally mutate a collection while iterating over it 
- Generics: Most collections are generic , so they can hold any type
- Methods: They come with rich APIs for iterations, filtering , mapping , etc. For example, Vec has psuh pop and iter; HashMap has insert , get and entry

### When to use which?

- Need a simmple list? Use Vec
- Working with text? Use String(&str for static text);
- Need key value pairs use HashMap
- Need unique items? Use Hashset

